I have already received several responses to my question about a
word processor for Sanskrit (Devanagari).  Thanks very much to
all!
 
Two correspondent suggested the Graphics Toolbox developed at
Penn by Jack Abercrombie.  However, one of the two warned that
when he had looked at it it used only a "lowest-
common-denominator" CGA display so the quality of the display was
not as good as he'd like, with a rather basic editor. The same
correspondent discussed some work that had been done at
Another correspondent pointed out that Multilingual Scribe
offered Devanagari (but not Tamil).  Two other people suggested
two pieces of software: one by a firm called LEABUS Ltd (114
Brandon St. London SE17 1AL tel: 01-708-2756), and the other by
Gamma Productions Ltd, 609-710 Wilshire Blvd, Santa Monica, CA
90401 USA (213)394-8622.
 
Another individual pointed me at James Nye's article entitled
"Indic Fonts for Computer Printers" (in South Asian Library Notes
and Queries 18 (Sprint 1985)).
 
Several people remarked that the Macintosh was a more natural
machine for this type of work.  I agree -- but our client here
already has an IBM PC and wishes to use it for this work.  Of the
people who have responded, none seemed to have used the software
they were describing -- they were (kindly) passing on what they
had heard.
 
Other people gave me a couple of other interesting leads. After I
have investigated them further, I'll post another note.