Humanities Research Center, 3060 JKHB, Brigham Young University
Provo, Utah 84602, (Tel.) 8013783513
 
I am a Professor of German and the Director of the Humanities
Research Center at Brigham Young University.  I have been
involved with using the computer in language research and
instruction since my graduate student days at Princeton, 1964-68.
My activities have included the development of language CAI,
diagnostic testing with the computer, interactive video (I worked
on the German VELVET program), computer assisted analysis of
modern German and English and the development and use of
electronic language corpora.  I have worked closely with the
developers of WordCruncher (aka BYU Concordance) to make certain
that the needs of humanists are properly met (e.g. foreign
character sets, substring searches, etc.).
 
In 1985 I organized (with the good assistance of my colleagues in
the HRC) the 7th International Conference on Computers and the
Humanities, which was held at BYU.  I am a member of the
Executive Council of the Association for Computers and the
Humanities, the Chairman of the Educational Software Evaluation
Committee of the Modern Language Association, a member of the
Committee on Information and Communication Technology of the
Linguistic Society of America, and a member of the Editorial
Board of "SYSTEM".  I have written articles and given lectures on
many aspects of the computer and language research and
instruction.
</div>
<div>
From: 
Subject: 
Date: 
X-Humanist: Vol. 1 Num. 362 (362)

*Lane, Simon &lt;CPI047@IBM.SOUTHAMPTON.AC.UK&gt;
 
Computing Service, University of Southampton, Highfield, Southampton,
England.
 
I am currently employed as a Programmer in the Computing Service
at Southampton University, England, and have special
responsibility for liaison with the Humanities departments within
the University, and support of their computing needs.
